Introduce new query language (Approach 3) (#266)
openid/OpenID4VP: openid-4-verifiable-presentations-1_0.md

OpenID for Verifiable Presentations extends existing OAuth 2.0 mechanisms as following:

* A new `presentation_definition` Authorization Request parameter that uses the [@!DIF.PresentationExchange] syntax is defined to request presentation of Verifiable Credentials in arbitrary formats. See (#vp_token_request) for more details. 
* A new query language is defined to enable requesting Verifiable Credentials in a more flexible way. See (#vp_query) for more details.

> * A new `vp_query` Authorization Request parameter is defined to request presentation of Verifiable Credentials in the JSON-encoded VP Query format. See (#vp_token_request) for more details.

Reviewer: I know its only bikeshedding but I wonder if `credential_query` is a more term accurate, the way I read this in plain english is that vp is the subject of the query, when in reality its not, the credential is, we could also go more generic and maybe just have query?

Author: I think I prefer the symmetry between `vp_query` and `vp_token`.

Reviewer 2: `vc_query` and `vp_token`?

Reviewer 3: maybe if we have a name for this query language, we could use the abbrevication here?

Author: `dcql_query`

This specification defines the following new request parameters:

`presentation_definition`:

> : A string containing a Presentation Definition JSON object. See (#request_presentation_definition) for more details. Exactly one of `vp_query` or `presentation_definition` or `presentation_definition_uri` MUST be present in the Authorization Request.

Reviewer: What would be the normative requirements of an implementation with regard to what an RP must support vs a wallet, the way I would read this is they would need to support all options to be compliant?

> : A string containing a Presentation Definition JSON object. See (#request_presentation_definition) for more details. Exactly one of `vp_query` or `presentation_definition` or `presentation_definition_uri` MUST be present in the Authorization Request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
: A string containing a Presentation Definition JSON object. See (#request_presentation_definition) for more details. Exactly one of  the following parameters MUST be present in the Authorization Request:`vp_query`, `presentation_definition`, `presentation_definition_uri`, or a `scope` value representing a Presentation Definition.
```
the current description is not complete because it does not cover scopes

If the Verifier responds with any HTTP error response, the Wallet MUST terminate the process.

# Verifiable Presentation Query Language {#vp_query}

The Verifiable Presentation Query Language (VP Query) is a JSON-encoded query
language that allows the Verifier to request the Wallet to present Verifiable
Credentials that match the query. The Verifier MAY encode constraints on the
combinations of credentials and claims that may be returned. The Wallet evaluates the
query against the Verifiable Credentials it holds and returns the Verifiable
Presentations that match the query.

A valid VP Query is defined as a JSON-encoded object with the following
top-level properties:

`expect_credentials`:
: REQUIRED. A non-empty array of Credential Queries as defined in (#credential_query)
that specify the requested Verifiable Credentials.

`valid_credential_sets`:

> : OPTIONAL. A non-empty array containing arrays of identifiers for elements in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
: OPTIONAL. A non-empty array containing arrays of identifiers for Credential Queries defined in
```

`expect_credentials` that defines which sets of Credentials may be returned.
The identifier MAY be postfixed by `?`, indicating that
delivery of the the respective credential is optional. For details, see
(#vp_query_lang_processing_rules).

Note: While this specification does not define additional top-level properties,
future extensions MAY define additional properties that modify the behavior of
the Wallet when processing the query.

## Credential Query {#credential_query}

A Credential Query is an object representing a request for one specific

> credential. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Credential. 
```

It contains the following properties:

`id`:

> : REQUIRED. A string identifying the credential in the response and, if provided,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
: REQUIRED. A string identifying the Credential in the response and, if provided,
```

> the constraints in `valid_credential_sets`.

Reviewer 3: Does this need the constraint to not have duplicate ids?

Author: Yes, I'll add that.

`format`:
: REQUIRED. A string that specifies the format of the requested

> Verifiable Credential. Valid Credential format identifier values are defined in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Verifiable Credential. Valid Credential Format Identifier values are defined in
```

> Appendix A of [@!OpenID.VCI]. The value of this property MUST be one of the

Reviewer 3: we usually say parameter instead of property in the spec currently

Author: Parameter is a strang word to use here.

> supported Credential formats as defined in the Wallet's metadata.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
supported Credential Formats as defined in the Wallet's metadata.
```

`expect_meta`: 
: OPTIONAL. An object defining additional properties requested by the Verifier that

> apply to the metadata and validity data of the credential. The properties of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
apply to the metadata and validity data of the Credential. The properties of
```

> this object are defined per format in (#format_specific_properties). If omitted,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
this object are defined per Credential Format in (#format_specific_properties). If omitted,
```

no specific restrictions are placed on the metadata or validity of the requested
Credential.

`expect_claims`:
: OPTIONAL. A non-empty array of objects as defined in (#claims_query) that specifies
claims in the requested Credentials.

`valid_claim_sets`:
: OPTIONAL. A non-empty array containing arrays of identifiers for elements in
`expect_claims`. The identifier MAY be postfixed by `?`, indicating that
delivery of the the respective claim is OPTIONAL.  

## Claims Query {#claims_query}

Each entry in `expect_claims` MUST be an object with the following properties:

`id`:
: REQUIRED if `valid_claim_sets` is present; OPTIONAL otherwise. A string
identifying the particular claim. The value MUST be a non-empty string
consisting of alphanumeric, underscore (`_`) or hyphen (`-`) characters.
Within the particular `expected_claims` array, the same `id` MUST NOT
be present more than once.

`path`:

> : REQUIRED if the credential format uses a JSON-based claims structure; MUST NOT

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
: REQUIRED if the Credential Format uses a JSON-based claims structure; MUST NOT
```

be present otherwise. The value MUST be a claims path pointer that specifies the path to the claim
within the Verifiable Credential, as defined in (#claims_path_pointer).

`namespace`:

> : REQUIRED if the credential format is based on ISO 18013-5; MUST NOT be present otherwise. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
: REQUIRED if the Credential Format is based on mdoc format defined in ISO 18013-5; MUST NOT be present otherwise. 
```
As I read it 18013-5 defines the generic mdoc format and the mDL. I would make it clear here this is about mdoc and not mDL

The value MUST be a string that specifies the namespace of the claim
within the Verifiable Credential, e.g., `org.iso.18013.5.1`.

`claim_name`:

> : REQUIRED if the credential format is based on ISO 18013-5; MUST NOT be present otherwise. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
: REQUIRED if the Credential Format is based on mdoc format defined in ISO 18013-5; MUST NOT be present otherwise. 
```

The value MUST be a string that specifies the name of the claim within the provided namespace

> in the Verifiable Credential, e.g., `first_name`.

Reviewer 3: Should those be moved into the Appendix into the Credential Format specifics?

of the claim match the type and value specified in the query.

`values`:
: OPTIONAL. An array of strings, integers or boolean values that specifies the expected values of the claim.
If the `values` property is present, the Wallet MUST return the claim only if the
type and value of the claim both match for at least one of the elements in the array.

### Selecting Claims and Credentials {#vp_query_lang_processing_rules}

The same basic logic applies for selecting claims and for selecting credentials, as detailed in the following.

#### Selecting Claims

The following rules apply for selecting claims via `expect_claims` and `valid_claim_sets`:

- If `expect_claims` is not provided, the Verifier expects all claims existing
  in the Credential to be returned.
- If `expect_claims` is provided, but `valid_claim_sets` is not provided,
  the Verifier expects all claims in `expect_claims` to be returned.
- Otherwise, the Verifier expects one combination of the claims listed in
  `valid_claim_sets`, with optional claims marked by the postfix `?`.

If the Wallet cannot fulfill the request by the Verifier, it MUST NOT

> return the respective credential.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
return the respective Credential.
```

#### Selecting Credentials

> The following rules apply for selecting credentials via `expect_credentials` and `valid_credential_sets`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following rules apply for selecting Credentials via `expect_credentials` and `valid_credential_sets`:
```

- If `valid_credential_sets` is not provided, the Verifier expects all

>   credentials in `expect_credentials` to be returned.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Credentials in `expect_credentials` to be returned.
```

> - Otherwise, the Verifier expects one combination of the credentials

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Otherwise, the Verifier expects one combination of the Credentials
```

  listed in `valid_credential_sets`, with optional credentials marked by the postfix `?`.

> Credentials not matching the respective restrictions expressed within

Reviewer 3: in the text above, constraints is used instead of restrictions

Author: Constraints is more accurate, I'll use that.

`expect_credentials` MUST NOT be returned, i.e., they are treated as if
they would not exist in the Wallet.

> If the Wallet cannot fulfill the request by the Verifier, it MUST NOT

Reviewer 3: To me the text is not clear enough what happens if Verifier requests Credentials A+B, but Wallet can only fulfil A. Must A be returned or nothing?

Author: I'll clarify. Incomplete sets must not be returned.

### Format `vc+sd-jwt` {#format_vc_sd_jwt}

`vct_values`:
: OPTIONAL. An array of strings that specifies allowed values for
the type of the requested Verifiable Credential. All elements in the array MUST
be valid type identifiers as defined in [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-sd-jwt-vc]. The Wallet
MAY return credentials that inherit from any of the specified types, following
the inheritance logic defined in [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-sd-jwt-vc].

`credential_signing_alg_values`:
: OPTIONAL. An array of strings that specifies
the allowed algorithms for signing the SD-JWT (i.e., only the issuer-signed part).

`kbjwt_signing_alg_values`:
: OPTIONAL. An array of strings that specifies the
allowed algorithms for signing the Key-Binding JWT (KB-JWT) (i.e., the part signed
by the holder).

`sd_alg_values`:
: OPTIONAL. An array of strings that specifies the allowed hash algorithms for
digests in the SD-JWT and KB-JWT.

### Format `mso_mdoc` {#format_mso_mdoc}

TBD

### Format `jwt_vp*`

TBD

## Claims Path Pointer {#claims_path_pointer}

A claims path pointer is a pointer into the JSON structure of the Verifiable
Credential, identifying one or more claims. A claims path pointer MUST be a

> non-empty array of strings and non-negative integers. A `*` string value indicates
> that all elements of the currently selected array(s) are to be selected; any other
> string indicates that the respective key is to be selected; and a non-negative
> integer indicates that the respective index in an array is to be selected. The path

Reviewer 3: I would start the enumeration with the most common use case
```suggestion
non-empty array of strings and non-negative integers. A string value 
indicates that the respective key is to be selected, the special string value `*` 
indicates that all elements of the currently selected array(s) are to be selected;
and a non-negative integer indicates that the respective index in an array is to be selected. The path
```

### Example

The following shows a non-normative, simplified example of a Credential:

```json
{
  "name": "Arthur Dent",
  "address": {
    "street_address": "42 Market Street",
    "locality": "Milliways",
    "postal_code": "12345"
  },
  "degrees": [
    {
      "type": "Bachelor of Science",
      "university": "University of Betelgeuse"
    },
    {
      "type": "Master of Science",
      "university": "University of Betelgeuse"
    }
  ],
  "nationalities": ["British", "Betelgeusian"]
}
```

The following shows examples of claims path queries and the respective selected
claims:

- `["name"]`: The claim `name` with the value `Arthur Dent` is selected.
- `["address"]`: The claim `address` with its sub-claims as the value is
  selected.
- `["address", "street_address"]`: The claim `street_address` with the value `42
  Market Street` is selected.
- `["degrees", "*", "type"]`: All `type` claims in the `degrees` array are
  selected.
- `["nationalities", 1]`: The second nationality is selected.
- `[]` (empty array): The entire Credential is selected.

### Processing

In detail, the array is processed by the Wallet from left to right as follows:

>  1. Select the root element of the credential, i.e., the top-level JSON object.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 1. Select the root element of the Credential, i.e., the top-level JSON object.
```

>  2. Process the query components from left to right:

Reviewer 3: The term "query components" is never mentioned before this

Author: Thanks, I'll change this to make clear what is meant.

If the Verifier responds with any HTTP error response, the Wallet MUST terminate the process.

> # Verifiable Presentation Query Language {#vp_query}

Reviewer 4: We had a discussion on optional data elements, documents etc. We were thinking of it conceptually like this:

A request for credentials aims to solve one or more (combination of) use cases. When addressing a particular use case the goal of the query language is to be have no ambiguity on what response addresses the use case or not. 

When addressing a particular use-case there should therefore not be any optional elements or documents, since if the use case is addressed with a particular combination of documents with their data elements providing more data elements is not necessary. 

But there can be requests that can address more than one use case. In that case there can be reasons to have some form of user choice. By having the use case layer to be the only layer where there is a form of optionality, it makes wallet implementations more straightforward and it also puts the place of optionality (which may mean user choice) at the place where it's most meaningful to the user (i.e. do you want to address use case x and/or y).

As a side-note If and when we have a use-case/purpose indicator, that's then also the place where we should do it.

Reviewer 2: this has been discussed in the WG and has been addressed in the latest commits

The Verifiable Presentation Query Language (VP Query) is a JSON-encoded query
language that allows the Verifier to request the Wallet to present Verifiable
Credentials that match the query. The Verifier MAY encode constraints on the
combinations of credentials and claims that are requested. The Wallet evaluates the
query against the Verifiable Credentials it holds and returns the Verifiable
Presentations that match the query.

A valid VP Query is defined as a JSON-encoded object with the following
top-level properties:

`expect_credentials`:
: REQUIRED. A non-empty array of Credential Queries as defined in (#credential_query)
that specify the requested Verifiable Credentials.

> `valid_credential_sets`:

Reviewer 4: Why is this array optional? It's simpler for parsing purposes if this is always present.

Reviewer: I think this is covered below in the "Selecting Credentials" section where omission means implicitly all credentials in the `expected_credentials` structure is expected to be returned. Text for clarity

> - If `valid_credential_sets` is not provided, the Verifier requests all
  Credentials in `expect_credentials` to be returned.

While I agree it might unify parsing rules I tend to prefer the approach from @danielfett as it keeps simple queries simpler from a syntax/expression/verbosity perspective.

: OPTIONAL. A non-empty array containing arrays of identifiers for Credential Queries defined in
`expect_credentials` that defines which sets of Credentials may be returned.
The identifier MAY be postfixed by `?`, indicating that
delivery of the the respective Credential is optional. For details, see
(#vp_query_lang_processing_rules).

Note: While this specification does not define additional top-level properties,
future extensions MAY define additional properties that modify the behavior of
the Wallet when processing the query.

## Credential Query {#credential_query}

A Credential Query is an object representing a request for one specific
Credential. 

It contains the following properties:

`id`:
: REQUIRED. A string identifying the Credential in the response and, if provided,

> the constraints in `valid_credential_sets`. The value MUST be a non-empty string

Author: At least we have to have the limitation that it doesn't contain a `?`...

> the constraints in `valid_credential_sets`. The value MUST be a non-empty string

Reviewer: Agreed I think we should simplify guidance here to just not include a `?` character.

> the constraints in `valid_credential_sets`. The value MUST be a non-empty string

Author: One reason for the restrictions is that we re-use the `id` (those for credentials) as JSON keys in the new structure of the VP Token. While JSON is technically not picky about the characters in keys, having simple strings there makes the consumption easier in some frameworks/languages. I just added the respective change to the VP Token structure in this PR, please review.

consisting of alphanumeric, underscore (`_`) or hyphen (`-`) characters.
Within the Authorization Request, the same `id` MUST NOT
be present more than once.

`format`:
: REQUIRED. A string that specifies the format of the requested
Verifiable Credential. Valid Credential Format Identifier values are defined in

> Appendix A of [@!OpenID.VCI]. The value of this property MUST be one of the

Reviewer 4: We should not reference the VCI spec for format identifiers that are used for presentment, but define them in this specification.

Author: Let's tackle that separately, there is a reference to the VCI spec for the same purpose in the metadata section. I suggest that you file a new issue to resolve that.

> Appendix A of [@!OpenID.VCI]. The value of this property MUST be one of the

Reviewer 4: "The value of this property MUST be one of the supported credential formats as defined in the wallet's metadata"
At least in the context of the browser-api this requirements should not apply. When the website makes a request it may not know what the wallet supports yet and the current protocol does not provide the wallet metadata to the RP before making the request.

Author: Good point, I removed that sentence.

supported Credential Formats as defined in the Wallet's metadata.

`expect_meta`: 
: OPTIONAL. An object defining additional properties requested by the Verifier that
apply to the metadata and validity data of the Credential. The properties of
this object are defined per Credential Format in (#format_specific_properties). If omitted,
no specific constraints are placed on the metadata or validity of the requested
Credential.

`expect_claims`:
: OPTIONAL. A non-empty array of objects as defined in (#claims_query) that specifies
claims in the requested Credentials.

`valid_claim_sets`:
: OPTIONAL. A non-empty array containing arrays of identifiers for elements in
`expect_claims`. The identifier MAY be postfixed by `?`, indicating that
delivery of the the respective claim is OPTIONAL.  

## Claims Query {#claims_query}

Each entry in `expect_claims` MUST be an object with the following properties:

> `id`:

Reviewer 4: Same comment as earlier about removing the limitations on the content of the string.

Reviewer 2: please open a separate issue if this is still a concern.

: REQUIRED if `valid_claim_sets` is present; OPTIONAL otherwise. A string
identifying the particular claim. The value MUST be a non-empty string
consisting of alphanumeric, underscore (`_`) or hyphen (`-`) characters.
Within the particular `expected_claims` array, the same `id` MUST NOT
be present more than once.

`path`:
: REQUIRED if the Credential Format uses a JSON-based claims structure; MUST NOT
be present otherwise. The value MUST be a claims path pointer that specifies the path to the claim
within the Verifiable Credential, as defined in (#claims_path_pointer).

`namespace`:
: REQUIRED if the Credential Format is based on mdoc format defined in ISO 18013-5; MUST NOT be present otherwise. 
The value MUST be a string that specifies the namespace of the claim
within the Verifiable Credential, e.g., `org.iso.18013.5.1`.

`claim_name`:
: REQUIRED if the Credential Format is based on mdoc format defined in ISO 18013-5; MUST NOT be present otherwise. 
The value MUST be a string that specifies the name of the claim within the provided namespace
in the Verifiable Credential, e.g., `first_name`.

> `value`:

Reviewer 4: We had a short discussion on this in the previous proposal, but we have not yet addressed this issues that we mentioned there. I'll copy them here:
- Matching on values can be complicated for wallet / credential selection. Because you may not have access to the value of the element at the selection time.
- Even after wallet selection, having access to the values of the data elements may still only be available after user consent because of security reasons (decryption etc). Meaning that the presentation may fail only after user consent.
- Values of data elements are not just strings, integers or booleans. Depending on the credential format they can be maps, arrays, byte strings or other items.
So besides requiring a stricter definition, mostly it's a mechanism that may just not be available because of security or ux reasons.
Since I don't know how to properly address issue 1 and 2 and a solution to issue 3 would be complicated I would not be in favor of having this mechanism since it's not a mechanism RPs can rely on.

Reviewer 4: Any comments on these concerns? Given these issues with data value matching removing the requirements for data value matching is our preferred option. Having a mechanism that is unreliable for the RP to use or could force wallets / credentials selectors to make implementations that compromise security or privacy should be considered very carefully.

Reviewer 2: this has been in the requirements: https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VP/issues/157

Reviewer 5: I don't have any more to add than I already said here:

https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VP/pull/260#discussion_r1759428617

We need to focus on solutions, not on trying to remove functionality that implementors are telling us is needed and that is already present in VP via PE. I've not seen an alternative solutions yet.

Reviewer 4: While generic value matching is a powerful feature, it also runs into the issues that were mentioned.
As mentioned in the call we could make support for the feature optional, which given the potential security and privacy implications is probably a safe bet, but it also means that Relying Parties either cannot rely on the feature or they do and we have bad UX flows.

If we know what specific use cases require data value matching we can come up with a solution that addresses the use case in a way that is reliable from an RP perspective.
An example would be to have Issuer matching, by allowed the RP to select credentials only issued by a particular issuer based on the signing certificate.

Reviewer 6: I think this feature is especially needed in cases where a RP wants to incrementally obtain credential data. Let's assume the RP requests a diploma first. This diploma has the name of its holder (claims based holder binding). The RP will then need to check whether it is actually interacting with this holder. I would expect it to send a request for an identity credential (e.g. a PID or a mDL), scoping the request to the holder's name using the value matching feature.

Reviewer 4: But requiring full access to the credential to do the matching can also have privacy and security implications. Which is why we need to carefully need to balance the pro's and cons of the solutions and see if there are more specific solutions possible for specific use cases.
Taking the example of names also has some issues with value matching. If my credential has my name as "Tom" and the values array is ["tom"] I would not be allowed to return the credential.

: OPTIONAL. A string, integer or boolean value that specifies the expected value of the claim. If the
`value` property is present, the Wallet MUST return the claim only if the type and value
of the claim match the type and value specified in the query.

`values`:
: OPTIONAL. An array of strings, integers or boolean values that specifies the expected values of the claim.
If the `values` property is present, the Wallet MUST return the claim only if the
type and value of the claim both match for at least one of the elements in the array.

### Selecting Claims and Credentials {#vp_query_lang_processing_rules}

The same basic logic applies for selecting claims and for selecting credentials, as detailed in the following.

#### Selecting Claims

The following rules apply for selecting claims via `expect_claims` and `valid_claim_sets`:

- If `expect_claims` is not provided, the Verifier requests all claims existing
  in the Credential.

> - If `expect_claims` is provided, but `valid_claim_sets` is not provided,

Reviewer 4: Does this mean that each potential combination of claims must be addressed. Does this mean that for each element where there are N alternatives, the amount of option in valdi_claim_sets is multiplied by (N+1)?
e.g. if you request
first_name_latin OR first_name_local
last_name_latin OR last_name_local
age_18 OR age_21 OR age_years OR date_of_birth
street_name OR full_address

You would have 24 sets in valid_claim_sets?

Author: That is correct with the current design.

Reviewer: The main limitation beyond verbosity I see with this approach is that if an RP wanted to convey say a purpose for requesting a piece of information from a user that maybe sourced from one or multiple possible claims there wouldn't be a way to do that efficiently. For example in the above an RP might want a single purpose string of "Your first name for our customer record" which would be common to both "first_name_latin" and "first_name_local" but I don't see how we could express that efficiently.

Reviewer 2: in query language option 1, there was no need for this kind of duplication, because the nested structure was used and people did not like that. The good news is that all that you mention can be expressed: ["first_name_latin" and "customer_record"] or ["first_name_local" and "customer_record"]. So if the preference is to not use nested structure, we should stick to this syntax, even if it means a lot of enumerations for certain cases. It could probably be optimized, but not sure we have enough reasons to start optimizing now.

Author: I'd like to add that you get repetitions for both "clean" forms, [CNF](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conjunctive_normal_form) and [DNF](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disjunctive_normal_form). There's no way around that.

  the Verifier requests all claims listed in `expect_claims`.

> - Otherwise, the Verifier requests one combination of the claims listed in

Reviewer 4: Is there a way to indicate preference for a certain claim? (typically for privacy reason, e.g. give me age_21 OR date_of_birth, preferring age_21)

Author: Not yet - it could be implicit by the order in `valid_claim_sets`

Reviewer: +1 to this as a feature and using simple array ordering to express preference would appear to be pragmatic.

Author: Either we use the existing order in `valid_claim_sets` or we could change this structure...

```json
  "valid_credential_sets": [
    ["pid", "nice_to_have?"],
    ["other_pid", "nice_to_have?"],
    ["pid_reduced_cred_1", "pid_reduced_cred_2", "nice_to_have?"]
  ]
```

to use objects in the array:

```json
  "valid_credential_sets": [
    {"priority": 3, "set": ["pid", "nice_to_have?"]},
    {"priority": 1, "set": ["other_pid", "nice_to_have?"]},
    {"priority": 1, "set": ["pid_reduced_cred_1", "pid_reduced_cred_2", "nice_to_have?"]}
  ]
```

Reviewer 2: I think using order in the array is sufficient. a better example is probably

"valid_credential_sets": [
    ["pid_reduced_cred_1?", "pid_reduced_cred_2?",]
  ]

where give me pid_reduced_cred_1 or pid_reduced_cred_2 but 1 is preferred

Reviewer 4: Is it then the intent to have order of preference for both claims as well as credentials?

The assumption is that when there are choices (give me this claim or that claim, give me this credential set or that credential set), there may be some privacy or usability benefits to making a particular choice, but both of them will satisfy the request of the reader and therefore give you the service, satisfy the use case etc.
This is why we say it's a preference, not a requirement. 

For claims, having an order of preference makes a lot of sense (hence the comment) since its boundary is within the credential. Typically the order of preference will/should be used for privacy reasons (e.g. age_over_18 vs date_of_birth, city_name vs full_address). There should be little to no cases where not meeting the order of preference from the reader comes at a cost (typically usability) to the holder.

But for credentials, there are a lot more considerations as to which of the options to satisfy. Some examples:
- Privacy (credential x is more minimized than credential y)
- Wallets preference by the user (credential x requires wallet x, but credential y can be used with wallet y)
- User authentication differences (credential x may be more cumbersome than credential y)
- UX (how do you indicate in a meaningful way that an RP prefers credential x, but credential y will still be acceptable)
- Presentation time (credential x may reside remote and therefore be slower than credential y)

Given that it ultimately shouldn't matter to the RP which credential is returned. I think it's safer to not have an order of preference for credentials for now, as different parts of the ecosystem (wallets, credential selector, RPs) can interpret the meaning of 'preference' differently which can lead to confusion.
We can then revisit this when we have more experience with implementations and real-life scenarios as to how to best approach this.

Reviewer 2: this got addressed by changing credentials to array of objects from array of arrays.

If the Verifier responds with any HTTP error response, the Wallet MUST terminate the process.

# Verifiable Presentation Query Language {#vp_query}

> The Verifiable Presentation Query Language (VP Query) is a JSON-encoded query

Reviewer: Same comment as above r.e naming the VP isn't the subject of the query IMO the credential is.

Reviewer 2: `Verifiable Credential Query Language (VC Query)` would work

Reviewer 7: digital credential?

Author: The whole spec talks about "verifiable credentials", so why change it here?

Reviewer 7: I can save my comment for a broader issue - it's a confusing term, and doubly confusing since the group is named digital credentials

language that allows the Verifier to request the Wallet to present Verifiable
Credentials that match the query. The Verifier MAY encode constraints on the
combinations of credentials and claims that are requested. The Wallet evaluates the
query against the Verifiable Credentials it holds and returns the Verifiable
Presentations that match the query.

A valid VP Query is defined as a JSON-encoded object with the following
top-level properties:

> `expect_credentials`:

Reviewer: A general nit across the query syntax proposed, I would suggest we just drop `expect_` from all parts of the syntax, it is after all, inside a query parameter that describes the surrounding data structures purpose.

Author: I dropped the `expect_` prefix throughout the PR.

Within the particular `expected_claims` array, the same `id` MUST NOT
be present more than once.

`path`:
: REQUIRED if the Credential Format uses a JSON-based claims structure; MUST NOT
be present otherwise. The value MUST be a claims path pointer that specifies the path to the claim
within the Verifiable Credential, as defined in (#claims_path_pointer).

`namespace`:
: REQUIRED if the Credential Format is based on mdoc format defined in ISO 18013-5; MUST NOT be present otherwise. 
The value MUST be a string that specifies the namespace of the claim
within the Verifiable Credential, e.g., `org.iso.18013.5.1`.

`claim_name`:
: REQUIRED if the Credential Format is based on mdoc format defined in ISO 18013-5; MUST NOT be present otherwise. 
The value MUST be a string that specifies the name of the claim within the provided namespace
in the Verifiable Credential, e.g., `first_name`.

`value`:
: OPTIONAL. A string, integer or boolean value that specifies the expected value of the claim. If the
`value` property is present, the Wallet MUST return the claim only if the type and value
of the claim match the type and value specified in the query.

> `values`:

Reviewer: Would suggest only having this option if we keep the match by value feature as you can accomplish the functionality provided by the `value` parameter with an array of 1 using the `values` parameter.

Reviewer: Also at the very least we would need to ensure value and values can both be present in a request.

Author: `value` and `values` are both defined in OIDC, some people might expect both to exist.

Author: I'll add clauses on mutual exclusivity of `value` and `values`

Reviewer: I dont think we should prioritise consistency with OIDC here, one parameter for this functionality would lead to simpler and more robust implementations, requiring mutual exclusivity in maps/objects can be a pain and liable to be a check certain implementations could miss. For example what should an implementation do if it encounters both, should it error?

Author: I'd like to hear what @selfissued thinks on this one.

Reviewer 2: +1 to only keeping `values`.

: OPTIONAL. An array of strings, integers or boolean values that specifies the expected values of the claim.
If the `values` property is present, the Wallet MUST return the claim only if the
type and value of the claim both match for at least one of the elements in the array.

### Selecting Claims and Credentials {#vp_query_lang_processing_rules}

The same basic logic applies for selecting claims and for selecting credentials, as detailed in the following.

#### Selecting Claims

> The following rules apply for selecting claims via `expect_claims` and `valid_claim_sets`:

Reviewer: Like `expect_` wonder if we should just have `claim_sets` and `credential_sets` instead.

Author: Agree, I dropped the `valid_` prefix.

- If `expect_claims` is not provided, the Verifier requests all claims existing
  in the Credential.
- If `expect_claims` is provided, but `valid_claim_sets` is not provided,
  the Verifier requests all claims listed in `expect_claims`.
- Otherwise, the Verifier requests one combination of the claims listed in
  `valid_claim_sets`, with optional claims marked by the postfix `?`.

If the Wallet cannot deliver all non-optional claims requested by the Verifier according to these rules, it MUST NOT
return the respective Credential.

#### Selecting Credentials

The following rules apply for selecting Credentials via `expect_credentials` and `valid_credential_sets`:

- If `valid_credential_sets` is not provided, the Verifier requests all
  Credentials in `expect_credentials` to be returned.
- Otherwise, the Verifier requests one combination of the Credentials
  listed in `valid_credential_sets`, with optional credentials marked by the postfix `?`.

Credentials not matching the respective constraints expressed within
`expect_credentials` MUST NOT be returned, i.e., they are treated as if
they would not exist in the Wallet.

> If the Wallet cannot deliver all non-optional Credentials requested by the Verifier according to these rules, it MUST NOT
> return any credential.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the Wallet cannot deliver all non-optional Credentials requested by the Verifier according to these rules, it MUST NOT
return any credential(s).
```

As some requests might involve the need to return multiple credentials and this sentence implied to me that only one could be returned.

## Format-specific Properties {#format_specific_properties}

The following format-specific properties are defined:

### Format `vc+sd-jwt` {#format_vc_sd_jwt}

`vct_values`:
: OPTIONAL. An array of strings that specifies allowed values for
the type of the requested Verifiable Credential. All elements in the array MUST
be valid type identifiers as defined in [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-sd-jwt-vc]. The Wallet
MAY return credentials that inherit from any of the specified types, following
the inheritance logic defined in [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-sd-jwt-vc].

`credential_signing_alg_values`:
: OPTIONAL. An array of strings that specifies
the allowed algorithms for signing the SD-JWT (i.e., only the issuer-signed part).

`kbjwt_signing_alg_values`:
: OPTIONAL. An array of strings that specifies the
allowed algorithms for signing the Key-Binding JWT (KB-JWT) (i.e., the part signed
by the holder).

`sd_alg_values`:
: OPTIONAL. An array of strings that specifies the allowed hash algorithms for

> digests in the SD-JWT and KB-JWT.

Reviewer: Prefer we remove these, as discussed previously I don't believe a usecase has been properly elaborated on and this creates needless complexity for majority of implementations and in worse cases possible security vulnerabilities through possible downgrade attacks.

  the Verifier requests all claims listed in `claims`.
- Otherwise, the Verifier requests one combination of the claims listed in
  `claim_sets`, with optional claims marked by the postfix `?`.

If the Wallet cannot deliver all non-optional claims requested by the Verifier according to these rules, it MUST NOT
return the respective Credential.

#### Selecting Credentials

The following rules apply for selecting Credentials via `credentials` and `credential_sets`:

- If `credential_sets` is not provided, the Verifier requests all
  Credentials in `credentials` to be returned.
- Otherwise, the Verifier requests one combination of the Credentials
  listed in `credential_sets`, with optional credentials marked by the postfix `?`.

Credentials not matching the respective constraints expressed within
`credentials` MUST NOT be returned, i.e., they are treated as if
they would not exist in the Wallet.

If the Wallet cannot deliver all non-optional Credentials requested by the Verifier according to these rules, it MUST NOT
return any credential(s).

## Format-specific Properties {#format_specific_properties}

The following format-specific properties are defined:

> ### Format `vc+sd-jwt` {#format_vc_sd_jwt}

Reviewer 7: we should use media types for all formats, or define our own formats

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### IETF SD-JWT VC {#format_vc_sd_jwt}
```

+1

Reviewer 8: I'd recommend against the media type here, but I would make it clear how to support whichever media types correspond to the structure of the claimsets that are desired by implementers of the spec, and that might require more than just listing the media type at this point.

- If `credential_sets` is not provided, the Verifier requests all
  Credentials in `credentials` to be returned.
- Otherwise, the Verifier requests one combination of the Credentials
  listed in `credential_sets`, with optional credentials marked by the postfix `?`.

Credentials not matching the respective constraints expressed within
`credentials` MUST NOT be returned, i.e., they are treated as if
they would not exist in the Wallet.

If the Wallet cannot deliver all non-optional Credentials requested by the Verifier according to these rules, it MUST NOT
return any credential(s).

## Format-specific Properties {#format_specific_properties}

The following format-specific properties are defined:

### Format `vc+sd-jwt` {#format_vc_sd_jwt}

`vct_values`:
: OPTIONAL. An array of strings that specifies allowed values for
the type of the requested Verifiable Credential. All elements in the array MUST
be valid type identifiers as defined in [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-sd-jwt-vc]. The Wallet
MAY return credentials that inherit from any of the specified types, following
the inheritance logic defined in [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-sd-jwt-vc].

> ### Format `mso_mdoc` {#format_mso_mdoc}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Mobile Documents or mdocs (ISO/IEC 18013 and ISO/IEC 23220 series) {#format_mso_mdoc}
```

aligning with https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VP/pull/266/files#r1793719707

`doctype_values`:

> : OPTIONAL. An array of strings that specifies allowed values for the

Reviewer 4: This field should be mandatory as there is no default value for doctype.
It's also not clear what is meant with "valid doctype identifiers as defined in ISO 18013-5". The only mandatory requirement on the doctype identifier is that it's a text string. If that's what meant I think it's cleaner to be explicit about that.

Reviewer: Should it be an array too? I would have thought it would only make sense for this to just be a string.

Reviewer: Same question I have for SD-JWT i think both properties should support a singular value.

Reviewer 4: Having a singular value makes sense to me as well.

The following section describes the logic that applies for selecting claims 
and for selecting credentials. 

Note: While this specification provides the mechanisms for requesting different
sets of claims and credentials, it does not make assumptions about the user 
interface of the Wallet, for example, if users can select which claims to present 
or which combination of credentials to present.

#### Selecting Claims {#selecting_claims}

The following rules apply for selecting claims via `claims` and `claim_sets`:

- If `claims` is not provided, the Verifier requests all claims existing
  in the Credential.
- If `claims` is provided, but `claim_sets` is not provided,
  the Verifier requests all claims listed in `claims`.
- Otherwise, the Verifier requests one combination of the claims listed in
  `claim_sets`. Claims listed without a postfix are requested unconditionally. 
  Claims postfixed by `?!` have to be provided by the Wallet if they exist on 
  the matched Credential. The order of the options conveyed in the `claim_sets`
  array expresses the Verifiers preference for what is returned. A wallet MUST 
  prioritise returning the most preferred option.

> With regard to the `claim_sets` syntax, the purpose of it to provide a way for a 
> verifier to describe alternative ways a given credential can satisfy their request, 
> the array ordering should express the Verifiers preference for how the request should 
> be fulfilled where the first element in the array is the most preferred and the last 
> element in the array is the least preferred. Verifiers should use the principle of 
> least information disclosure to influence how they order these options. For example a 
> proof of age request should prioritise requesting an attribute like `age_over_18` ahead
> of requesting an attribute like `birth_date`.

Author: ```suggestion
The purpose of the `claim_sets` syntax is to provide a way for a 
verifier to describe alternative ways a given credential can satisfy the request. 
The array ordering expresses the Verifier's preference for how the request should 
be fulfilled where the first element in the array is the most preferred and the last 
element in the array is the least preferred. Verifiers should use the principle of 
least information disclosure to influence how they order these options. For example, a 
proof of age request should prioritize requesting an attribute like `age_over_18` over
an attribute like `birth_date`.
```

Credential.

`claims`:
: OPTIONAL. A non-empty array of objects as defined in (#claims_query) that specifies
claims in the requested Credentials.

`claim_sets`:
: OPTIONAL. A non-empty array containing arrays of identifiers for
elements in `claims`. The rules for selecting claims to send are defined in (#selecting_claims).

Note that multiple Credential Queries in a request MAY request a presentation of the same Credential.

## Credential Set Query {#credential_set_query}

A Credential Set Query is an object representing a request for one or more credentials to satisfy
a particular use case with the Verifier.

Each entry in `credential_sets` MUST be an object with the following properties:

`options`
: REQUIRED: A non-empty array, where each value in the array represents a distinct query that satisfies 
the use case. The value of each element in the `options` array is an array of identifiers which reference
elements in `credentials`.

`required`
: OPTIONAL. A boolean flag which indicates whether the wallet is required to respond to the query. 
If omitted, the effective value MUST be processed as `true`.

> 

Author: I'll clarify by changing this to:

> A boolean flag which indicates whether this set of Credentials is required
to satisfy the particular use case at the Verifier.

> 

Reviewer 9: Good. I like this wording much better and now the meaning is clear. Thankyou.

If the `values` property is present, the Wallet SHOULD return the claim only if the
type and value of the claim both match for at least one of the elements in the array. Details of the processing rules are defined in (#selecting_claims).

### Selecting Claims and Credentials {#vp_query_lang_processing_rules}

The following section describes the logic that applies for selecting claims 
and for selecting credentials. 

Note: While this specification provides the mechanisms for requesting different
sets of claims and credentials, it does not make assumptions about the user 
interface of the Wallet, for example, if users can select which claims to present 
or which combination of credentials to present.

#### Selecting Claims {#selecting_claims}

The following rules apply for selecting claims via `claims` and `claim_sets`:

- If `claims` is not provided, the Verifier requests all claims existing
  in the Credential.
- If `claims` is provided, but `claim_sets` is not provided,
  the Verifier requests all claims listed in `claims`.
- Otherwise, the Verifier requests one combination of the claims listed in
  `claim_sets`. The order of the options conveyed in the `claim_sets`

>   array expresses the Verifiers' preference for what is returned; the Wallet MUST return

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
  array expresses the Verifiers' preference for what is returned; the Wallet SHOULD return
```
as per @martijnharing 's comment, the RP cannot mandate the wallet to do anything.

Author: That doesn't mean we cannot define rules for the Wallet. There may be other reasons to say "SHOULD" here and I'm open to discuss them, but this is not a good reason.

Reviewer 4: Also strongly in favor in making this a SHOULD as describes in my comment earlier. Since from an RPs perspective all the options in the array should be sufficient to achieve the use case, there is no reason to mandate a particular option.

Reviewer 9: If we use the word MUST then a conformance test will be written for the wallet, and wallets that allow the user to choose a low priority set will fail the test. This is an important consideration for the EDIW. Do we really want wallets that allow user choice to fail to be certified?

Reviewer 4: If we define that there is no difference to the RP which of the elements in claim_sets is returned means that there is no necessity to have a user choice and allows the wallet to return whatever is simplest. It makes it explicit that it doesn't matter what in the array is returned but also makes it clear that in the absence of any other wallet logic it should just be the first element. Therefore I'm in favor of recommending to return the first item in the order of preference.
However, actually mandating behavior on the wallet side means that there is no leeway to the wallet to deviate for any reason. Some examples where the wallet may want to deviate from the mandatory behavior:

- Request for [age_over_18, date_of_birth], the wallet wants to return age_over_21.
- Request for [on_device_auth, portrait], where the on_device_auth element requires an external factor that is not available, or adds significant friction that the user does not want to accept.
- Request for [element_y, element_x] and [element_a, element_x] where the credential contains element_x and element_y. Returning the first element element of the array would result in returning more than required.

If the only reason to actually mandate the behavior is because it would address the 'conditional' use-case, that to me does not seem to be worth the potential issues caused by that. As you mentioned, conditional is likely a very specific set of use cases and making I specific mechanism for that therefore seems fitting. We could also explore whether addressing it through issuer selection can address all the use cases otherwise handled by 'conditional'.

Author: > * Request for [age_over_18, date_of_birth], the wallet wants to return age_over_21.

This would be unexpected for the Verifier and hard to process. If the verifier knows age_over_21, with the current solution, it could just list it first.

> * Request for [on_device_auth, portrait], where the on_device_auth element requires an external factor that is not available, or adds significant friction that the user cannot accept at that time.

In this case, the claim might just not be available - we can add more precise language around what "unavailable" means later on.

> * Request for [element_y, element_x] and [element_a, element_x] where the credential contains element_x and element_y. Returning the first element element of the array would result in returning more than required.

I don't understand. If the credential contains both y and x, it can just send it.

Reviewer 9: Regarding "purpose", each claim set in the claim sets should have a purpose so that the user knows what the purpose of the claim set is. It does not mater what each alternative choice in the claim set is, because they should all be equivalent from the RP's perspective. So I maintain that the user should be able to choose between the alternative choices in a claim set, and either go with the RP's preferred priority, or not.

  the first option that it can satisfy. If the Wallet cannot satisfy any of the
  options, it MUST NOT return any claims.

When a Claims Query contains a restriction on the values of a claim, the Wallet
SHOULD NOT return the claim if its value does not match at least one of the
elements in `values` i.e., the claim should be treated the same as if it did not
exist in the Credential. Implementing this restriction may not be possible in
all cases, for example, if the Wallet does not have access to the claim value
before presentation or user consent or if another component routing
the request to the Wallet does not have access to the claim value. Therefore, Verifiers
must treat restrictions expressed using `values` as a best-effort way to improve
user privacy, but MUST NOT rely on it for security checks.

The purpose of the `claim_sets` syntax is to provide a way for a 
verifier to describe alternative ways a given credential can satisfy the request. 

> The array ordering expresses the Verifier's preference for how the request must 

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
The array ordering expresses the Verifier's preference for how the request should 
```

be fulfilled. The first element in the array is the most preferred and the last 
element in the array is the least preferred. Verifiers SHOULD use the principle of 
least information disclosure to influence how they order these options. For example, a 
proof of age request should prioritize requesting an attribute like `age_over_18` over
an attribute like `birth_date`.

If the Wallet cannot deliver all claims requested by the Verifier
according to these rules, it MUST NOT return the respective Credential.

#### Selecting Credentials

The following rules apply for selecting Credentials via `credentials` and `credential_sets`:

- If `credential_sets` is not provided, the Verifier requests all
  Credentials in `credentials` to be returned.

> - Otherwise, the Verifier requests all of the credential set queries in the `credential_sets` array

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
- Otherwise, if `credential_sets` is provided, and  the `required` property is set to true or is absent,  the Verifier is requesting that all of the credentials from one of  the credential sets in the "query_options" is returned. 
```

Reviewer: I prefer @danielfett language here, this suggested language is much harder to grok.

Author: Agree with @tplooker. Also, the proposed wording doesn't quite work — `required` is defined per entry in `credential_sets`.

Reviewer 9: But the original wording is ambiguous at best, and not understandable at worst. So more clear wording is definitely needed.

Reviewer 9: The whole text from line 791 to 793

> Otherwise, the Verifier requests all of the credential set queries in the `credential_sets` array with `required` evaluated as true to be returned at a minimum and optionally any of the credential set queries with `required` evaluated as false.

>   with `required` evaluated as true to be returned at a minimum and optionally any of the credential set queries 

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
  Otherwise if the `required` property is false, then any (or none) of the credentials from one of the credential sets in the "query_options" may be returned. 
```

Reviewer: Same as above prefer @danielfett language

Reviewer 2: I actually agree with David and i don't understand what this sentence about required is supposed to mean

Reviewer 2: made a suggestion below

Author: I proposed new text, please re-review.

>   with `required` evaluated as true to be returned at a minimum and optionally any of the credential set queries 

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
  
```

Reviewer 2: i don't think removing this is an option, please see my suggestion below.

>   with `required` evaluated as false.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
  
```

Reviewer 2: i don't think removing this is an option, please see my suggestion below.

- For each credential set query inside the `credential_sets` array, in order to
  satisfy the query, the Wallet MUST return a credential or credentials that
  match to one of the `options` inside the object. It is typically
  expected that the Wallet presents the End-User with a choice of which
  credential to present if multiple credentials match the query.

Credentials not matching the respective constraints expressed within
`credentials` MUST NOT be returned, i.e., they are treated as if
they would not exist in the Wallet.

If the Wallet cannot deliver all non-optional Credentials requested by the
Verifier according to these rules, it MUST NOT return any credential(s).

## Format-specific Properties {#format_specific_properties}

The following format-specific properties are defined:

> ### IETF SD-JWT VC {#format_vc_sd_jwt}

Reviewer 7: I generally see risk in statically defining formats this query language works against. I would rather see us leverage a registry with associated guidance on how to plug into the general query language structure.

Reviewer 7: similarly I would not support merging this PR without including at least w3c verifiable credentials - probably plain ID tokens/JWTs would be good too. the world is bigger than mdoc and ietf sd jwt vc

Reviewer 2: this section is literally part of `## Format-specific Properties {#format_specific_properties}`, I made a suggestion to clarify that oid4vp is credential format agnostic and that "Other specifications or deployments can define their own Credential Format Profiles". Having said that, we can add w3c vdm profile of the query language, please open an issue and make a proposal. but that should not stop merging this PR as a starting point.

Reviewer 7: https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VP/issues/284

the inheritance logic defined in [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-sd-jwt-vc].

### Mobile Documents or mdocs (ISO/IEC 18013 and ISO/IEC 23220 series) {#format_mso_mdoc}

`doctype_values`:
: OPTIONAL. An array of strings that specifies allowed values for the
doctype of the requested Verifiable Credential. All elements in the array MUST
be valid doctype identifiers as defined in ISO 18013-5.

## Claims Path Pointer {#claims_path_pointer}

A claims path pointer is a pointer into the JSON structure of the Verifiable
Credential, identifying one or more claims. A claims path pointer MUST be a
non-empty array of strings and non-negative integers. A string value 
indicates that the respective key is to be selected, the special string value `*` 
indicates that all elements of the currently selected array(s) are to be selected;
and a non-negative integer indicates that the respective index in an array is to be selected. The path
is formed as follows:

  - Start with an empty array.
  - To address a particular claim within an object, append the key (claim name)
    to the array.
  - To address an element within an array, append the index to the array (as a
    non-negative, 0-based integer).

>   - To address all elements within an array, append the string `*` to the array.

Reviewer 7: this reads as a less-specified version of json path (which isn't really specified to begin with but [I see progress here](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-goessner-dispatch-jsonpath-00.html))

without this being testable (and tested) there's similar room for error/risk as were raised to using json path to begin with

Author: JsonPath is more complicated, requires complex string parsing, requires the implementation of many features that are not necessary to select a claim, and is a query language, not a pointer language (JsonPath would be appropriate to use). It is also somewhat inviting to severe security problems (the 'expression' syntax). That's why we didn't use it. We already received early feedback from implementers that they appreciate us not using JsonPath.

Reviewer 2: if necessary, please open an issue to track/get implementer's feedback on this new approach compared to json path. but without merging this and getting people to try it out, we will not get those in the first place.

Reviewer 7: https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VP/issues/286

I do not like the idea of merging controversial items and then trying to change them later. we all know that those later changes may not reach consensus and could be fought. this kind of tactic starts the ossification of controversial introductions to the spec which isn't so friendly.

Reviewer 3: There has been extensive discussion on this. One of the main motivations for this was to get rid of JSON Path. We investigated JSON Pointer and identified things that could not be covered. Are you aware of other options? I think the proposed format is the simplest possible mechanism and was appreaciated by early developer's feedback

    1. If the component is a string, select the element in the respective
       key in the currently selected element(s). If any of the currently
       selected element(s) is not an object, abort processing and return an
       error. If the key does not exist in any element currently selected,
       remove that element from the selection.
    2. If the component is `*`, select all elements of the currently
       selected array(s). If any of the currently selected element(s) is not an
       array, abort processing and return an error.
    3. If the component is a non-negative integer, select the element at
       the respective index in the currently selected array(s). If any of the
       currently selected element(s) is not an array, abort processing and
       return an error. If the index does not exist in a selected array, remove
       that array from the selection.
  3. If the set of elements currently selected is empty, abort processing and
     return an error.

The result of the processing is the set of elements which is requested for
presentation.

## Examples {#vp_query_examples}

The following is a non-normative example of a VP Query that requests a Verifiable

> Credential of the format `vc+sd-jwt` with a type value of

Reviewer 7: same comment as above - let's please not use media types that are unregistered. instead we can have a registry or have the spec define format identifiers.

Reviewer 2: same response as above. this PR is not a place to change a credential format identifier - needs to be a separate issue/PR

Reviewer 7: https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VP/issues/285

`id`:
: REQUIRED if `claim_sets` is present in the Credential Query; OPTIONAL otherwise. A string
identifying the particular claim. The value MUST be a non-empty string
consisting of alphanumeric, underscore (`_`) or hyphen (`-`) characters.
Within the particular `claims` array, the same `id` MUST NOT
be present more than once.

`path`:
: REQUIRED if the Credential Format uses a JSON-based claims structure; MUST NOT
be present otherwise. The value MUST be a claims path pointer that specifies the path to the claim
within the Verifiable Credential, as defined in (#claims_path_pointer).

`namespace`:
: REQUIRED if the Credential Format is based on the mdoc format defined in ISO 18013-5; MUST NOT be present otherwise. 
The value MUST be a string that specifies the namespace of the data element
within the mdoc, e.g., `org.iso.18013.5.1`.

`claim_name`:
: REQUIRED if the Credential Format is based on mdoc format defined in ISO 18013-5; MUST NOT be present otherwise. 
The value MUST be a string that specifies the data element identifier of the data element within the provided namespace
in the mdoc, e.g., `first_name`.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`conditional`:
: OPTIONAL. A boolean that can be used to indicate that an element is only required if it is present in the credential. 
If the value is present, the RP indicates if the element is present in the credential, it is required to be returned.
Note that because from a security perspective the RP cannot rely on the wallet to be truthful about the presence of data elements in the credential, this indicator can only be meaningfully used if the RP knows through an out-of-band mechanism whether a credential must have certain element or not. 
```

Add conditional elements as an explicit mechanism instead of relying on mandating the wallet to adhere to the order of preference.

  in the Credential.
- If `claims` is provided, but `claim_sets` is not provided,
  the Verifier requests all claims listed in `claims`.
- Otherwise, the Verifier requests one combination of the claims listed in
  `claim_sets`. The order of the options conveyed in the `claim_sets`
  array expresses the Verifiers' preference for what is returned; the Wallet MUST return
  the first option that it can satisfy. If the Wallet cannot satisfy any of the
  options, it MUST NOT return any claims.

When a Claims Query contains a restriction on the values of a claim, the Wallet
SHOULD NOT return the claim if its value does not match at least one of the
elements in `values` i.e., the claim should be treated the same as if it did not
exist in the Credential. Implementing this restriction may not be possible in
all cases, for example, if the Wallet does not have access to the claim value
before presentation or user consent or if another component routing
the request to the Wallet does not have access to the claim value. Therefore, Verifiers
must treat restrictions expressed using `values` as a best-effort way to improve
user privacy, but MUST NOT rely on it for security checks.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When a claim has the `conditional` element set to true and it is not present on the credential, the wallet can consider that element to be satisfied.
```

The purpose of the `claim_sets` syntax is to provide a way for a 
verifier to describe alternative ways a given credential can satisfy the request. 

> The array ordering expresses the Verifier's preference for how the request must 
> be fulfilled. The first element in the array is the most preferred and the last 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The array ordering expresses the Verifier's preference for how to fulfill the request. The first element in the array is the most preferred and the last 
```
to address David's comment above

Reviewer 9: This a different sentence. Mine is lines line 791 to 793

`Otherwise, the Verifier requests all of the credential set queries in the credential_sets array with required evaluated as true to be returned at a minimum and optionally any of the credential set queries with required evaluated as false.`

element in the array is the least preferred. Verifiers SHOULD use the principle of 
least information disclosure to influence how they order these options. For example, a 
proof of age request should prioritize requesting an attribute like `age_over_18` over
an attribute like `birth_date`.

If the Wallet cannot deliver all claims requested by the Verifier
according to these rules, it MUST NOT return the respective Credential.

#### Selecting Credentials

The following rules apply for selecting Credentials via `credentials` and `credential_sets`:

- If `credential_sets` is not provided, the Verifier requests all
  Credentials in `credentials` to be returned.

> - Otherwise, the Verifier requests all of the Credential Set Queries in the `credential_sets` array
>   with `required` evaluated as true to be returned at a minimum and optionally any of the credential set queries 
>   with `required` evaluated as false.

Reviewer 2: I actually agree with David and i don't understa

```suggestion
- Otherwise, the Verifier requests all of the Credential Set Queries in the `credential_sets` array.
  When `required` parameter is set to true or is omitted, Credential Set Queries MUST be fulfilled. When `required` parameter is set to false, fulfilling Credential Set Queries is optional.
```

Reviewer 9: When the `required` parameter is set to true or is omitted, one of the Credential Set `options` MUST be fulfilled. When the `required` parameter is set to false, fulfilling one of the Credential Set `options` is optional.

Author: I proposed new text, please re-review.

expected that the Wallet presents the End-User with a choice of which
credential to present if multiple credentials match the query.

Credentials not matching the respective constraints expressed within
`credentials` MUST NOT be returned, i.e., they are treated as if
they would not exist in the Wallet.

If the Wallet cannot deliver all non-optional Credentials requested by the
Verifier according to these rules, it MUST NOT return any credential(s).

#### User Interface Considerations {#vp_query_ui}

While this specification provides the mechanisms for requesting different sets
of claims and credentials, it does not make assumptions about the user interface
of the Wallet, for example, if users can select which combination of credentials
to present.

#### Security Considerations {#vp_query_security}

While the Verifier can specify various constraints both on the claims level and
the credential level as shown above, it MUST NOT rely on the Wallet to enforce
these constraints. The Wallet is not controlled by the Verifier and the Verifier
MUST perform its own security checks on the returned credentials and
presentations.

## Format-specific Properties {#format_specific_properties}

> The following format-specific properties are defined:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OpenID for Verifiable Presentations is Credential Format agnostic, i.e., it is designed to allow applications to request and receive Verifiable Presentations and Verifiable Credentials in any Credential Format. This section defines Credential Format Profiles for some of the known Credential Formats. Other specifications or deployments can define their own Credential Format Profiles:
```

Reviewer 2: one option would be to move these credential format specific parts to annex B, but that should be another issue/PR.

### IETF SD-JWT VC {#format_vc_sd_jwt}

`vct_values`:
: OPTIONAL. An array of strings that specifies allowed values for
the type of the requested Verifiable Credential. All elements in the array MUST
be valid type identifiers as defined in [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-sd-jwt-vc]. The Wallet
MAY return credentials that inherit from any of the specified types, following
the inheritance logic defined in [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-sd-jwt-vc].

### Mobile Documents or mdocs (ISO/IEC 18013 and ISO/IEC 23220 series) {#format_mso_mdoc}

`doctype_values`:

> : OPTIONAL. An array of strings that specifies allowed values for the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
: OPTIONAL. A string that specifies allowed values for the
```

Author: If we want to have this change (I'm not sure), the parameter should be renamed as well.

Reviewer 2: made a suggestion below

> `doctype_values`:
> : OPTIONAL. An array of strings that specifies allowed values for the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`doctype_value`:
: OPTIONAL. String that specifies allowed values for the
```

> doctype of the requested Verifiable Credential. All elements in the array MUST

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
doctype of the requested Verifiable Credential. MUST be a valid doctype identifier as defined in ISO 18013-5.
```

Reviewer 2: made a suggestion below

> `doctype_values`:
> : OPTIONAL. An array of strings that specifies allowed values for the
> doctype of the requested Verifiable Credential. All elements in the array MUST
> be valid doctype identifiers as defined in ISO 18013-5.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`doctype_value`:
: OPTIONAL. String that specifies an allowed value for the
doctype of the requested Verifiable Credential. It MUST
be a valid doctype identifier as defined in [@ISO.18013-5].
```
also, let's be consistent with the references :)

indicates that all elements of the currently selected array(s) are to be selected;
and a non-negative integer indicates that the respective index in an array is to be selected. The path
is formed as follows:

  - Start with an empty array.
  - To address a particular claim within an object, append the key (claim name)
    to the array.
  - To address an element within an array, append the index to the array (as a
    non-negative, 0-based integer).
  - To address all elements within an array, append the string `*` to the array.

Verifiers MUST NOT point to the same claim more than once in a single query.
Wallets SHOULD ignore such duplicate claim queries.

### Example

The following shows a non-normative, simplified example of a Credential:

```json
{
  "name": "Arthur Dent",
  "address": {
    "street_address": "42 Market Street",
    "locality": "Milliways",
    "postal_code": "12345"
  },
  "degrees": [
    {
      "type": "Bachelor of Science",
      "university": "University of Betelgeuse"
    },
    {
      "type": "Master of Science",
      "university": "University of Betelgeuse"
    }
  ],
  "nationalities": ["British", "Betelgeusian"]
}
```

> The following shows examples of claims path pointeres and the respective selected

Reviewer 5: Typo:

```suggestion
The following shows examples of claims path pointers and the respective selected
```

If the Verifier responds with any HTTP error response, the Wallet MUST terminate the process.

# Verifiable Presentation Query Language {#vp_query}

The Verifiable Presentation Query Language (VP Query) is a JSON-encoded query
language that allows the Verifier to request Verifiable
Presentations that match the query. The Verifier MAY encode constraints on the
combinations of credentials and claims that are requested. The Wallet evaluates the
query against the Verifiable Credentials it holds and returns the Verifiable
Presentations that match the query.

A valid VP Query is defined as a JSON-encoded object with the following
top-level properties:

`credentials`:
: REQUIRED. A non-empty array of Credential Queries as defined in (#credential_query)
that specify the requested Verifiable Credentials.

`credential_sets`:
: OPTIONAL. A non-empty array of credential set queries as defined in (#credential_set_query)
that specifies additional constraints on which of the requested Verifiable Credentials to return.

Note: While this specification does not define additional top-level properties,
future extensions MAY define additional properties that modify the behavior of

> the Wallet when processing the query.

Reviewer 2: ignore unknown property would be a default behavior. please open a new PR

> the Wallet when processing the query.

Author: I'll include this in the last changes before merging.

Credential.

Each entry in `credentials` MUST be an object with the following properties:

`id`:
: REQUIRED. A string identifying the Credential in the response and, if provided,
the constraints in `credential_sets`. The value MUST be a non-empty string
consisting of alphanumeric, underscore (`_`) or hyphen (`-`) characters.
Within the Authorization Request, the same `id` MUST NOT
be present more than once.

`format`:
: REQUIRED. A string that specifies the format of the requested
Verifiable Credential. Valid Credential Format Identifier values are defined in
Appendix A of [@!OpenID.VCI].

`meta`: 
: OPTIONAL. An object defining additional properties requested by the Verifier that
apply to the metadata and validity data of the Credential. The properties of
this object are defined per Credential Format in (#format_specific_properties). If omitted,
no specific constraints are placed on the metadata or validity of the requested
Credential.

`claims`:
: OPTIONAL. A non-empty array of objects as defined in (#claims_query) that specifies
claims in the requested Credentials.

`claim_sets`:
: OPTIONAL. A non-empty array containing arrays of identifiers for

> elements in `claims`. The rules for selecting claims to send are defined in (#selecting_claims).
> 

Reviewer 3: Giving a brief introduction about the meaning of the parameter
```suggestion
elements in `claims` that specifies which combinations of `claims` for the Credential are requested.
The rules for selecting claims to send are defined in (#selecting_claims).

```

satisfies the use case. The value of each element in the `options` array is an
array of identifiers which reference elements in `credentials`.

`required`
: OPTIONAL. A boolean which indicates whether this set of Credentials is required
to satisfy the particular use case at the Verifier. If omitted, the default value is `true`.

`purpose`
: OPTIONAL. A string, number or object specifying the purpose of the
query. This specification does not define a specific structure or specific values
for this property. The purpose is intended to be used by the Verifier to
communicate the reason for the query to the Wallet. The Wallet MAY use this
information to show the user the reason for the request.

## Claims Query {#claims_query}

Each entry in `claims` MUST be an object with the following properties:

`id`:
: REQUIRED if `claim_sets` is present in the Credential Query; OPTIONAL otherwise. A string
identifying the particular claim. The value MUST be a non-empty string
consisting of alphanumeric, underscore (`_`) or hyphen (`-`) characters.
Within the particular `claims` array, the same `id` MUST NOT
be present more than once.

> 

Reviewer 10: As an alternative, couldn't we specify this object schema for each of the specified formats, similarly to what we do in VCI, instead of stating that it must be present on a format and absent every other formats.
I.e.
- `vc+sd-jwt`
    - `path` - REQUIRED (...)
- `mso_mdoc`
    -  `namespace`: REQUIRED (...)
    - `claim_name`: REQUIRED (...)    
     
E.g. this way we are forbidding `namespace` or `claim_name` to ever be used in a format which isn't based on mdoc.

Reviewer 3: I agree, would seem cleaner to me to move these things to the Appendix B where each format is described an have a subsection there?

Reviewer 7: +1 I opened #284 along these lines

Reviewer 2: i thin that was where we started in the very first proposal but we ended up with this `meta` claim after discussions

`namespace`:
: REQUIRED if the Credential Format is based on the mdoc format defined in ISO 18013-5; MUST NOT be present otherwise. 
The value MUST be a string that specifies the namespace of the data element
within the mdoc, e.g., `org.iso.18013.5.1`.

`claim_name`:
: REQUIRED if the Credential Format is based on mdoc format defined in ISO 18013-5; MUST NOT be present otherwise. 
The value MUST be a string that specifies the data element identifier of the data element within the provided namespace
in the mdoc, e.g., `first_name`.

`values`:
: OPTIONAL. An array of strings, integers or boolean values that specifies the expected values of the claim.
If the `values` property is present, the Wallet SHOULD return the claim only if the
type and value of the claim both match for at least one of the elements in the array. Details of the processing rules are defined in (#selecting_claims).

### Selecting Claims and Credentials {#vp_query_lang_processing_rules}

The following section describes the logic that applies for selecting claims 
and for selecting credentials. 

#### Selecting Claims {#selecting_claims}

The following rules apply for selecting claims via `claims` and `claim_sets`:

> - If `claims` is not provided, the Verifier requests all claims existing
>   in the Credential.
> - If `claims` is provided, but `claim_sets` is not provided,
>   the Verifier requests all claims listed in `claims`.
> - Otherwise, the Verifier requests one combination of the claims listed in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- If `claims` is absent, the Verifier requests all claims existing
  in the Credential.
- If `claims` is present, but `claim_sets` is absent,
  the Verifier requests all claims listed in `claims`.
- If both `claims` and `claim_sets` is present, the Verifier requests one combination of the claims listed in
```

Author: ```suggestion
- If `claims` is absent, the Verifier requests all claims existing
  in the Credential.
- If `claims` is present, but `claim_sets` is absent,
  the Verifier requests all claims listed in `claims`.
- If both `claims` and `claim_sets` are present, the Verifier requests one combination of the claims listed in
```

  `claim_sets`. The order of the options conveyed in the `claim_sets`

>   array expresses the Verifiers' preference for what is returned; the Wallet MUST return

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  array expresses the Verifier's preference for what is returned; the Wallet MUST return
```

  the first option that it can satisfy. If the Wallet cannot satisfy any of the

>   options, it MUST NOT return any claims.

Reviewer 10: "it MUST NOT return any claims." means not returning the credential, right?

and in the rest of the DCQL data structure. Implementations MUST ignore any
unknown properties.

## Credential Query {#credential_query}

A Credential Query is an object representing a request for a presentation of one
Credential.

Each entry in `credentials` MUST be an object with the following properties:

`id`:
: REQUIRED. A string identifying the Credential in the response and, if provided,
the constraints in `credential_sets`. The value MUST be a non-empty string
consisting of alphanumeric, underscore (`_`) or hyphen (`-`) characters.
Within the Authorization Request, the same `id` MUST NOT
be present more than once.

`format`:
: REQUIRED. A string that specifies the format of the requested
Verifiable Credential. Valid Credential Format Identifier values are defined in
Appendix A of [@!OpenID.VCI].

`meta`: 
: OPTIONAL. An object defining additional properties requested by the Verifier that
apply to the metadata and validity data of the Credential. The properties of
this object are defined per Credential Format in (#format_specific_properties). If omitted,
no specific constraints are placed on the metadata or validity of the requested
Credential.

> `claims`:
> : OPTIONAL. A non-empty array of objects as defined in (#claims_query) that specifies
> claims in the requested Credentials.

Reviewer 11: Maybe I'm not getting it but every other thing at this level is about a single credential so this one being about "requested Credentials" seems not right? 

```suggestion
`claims`:
: OPTIONAL. A non-empty array of objects as defined in (#claims_query) that specifies
claims in the requested Credential.
```

Each entry in `claims` MUST be an object with the following properties:

`id`:
: REQUIRED if `claim_sets` is present in the Credential Query; OPTIONAL otherwise. A string
identifying the particular claim. The value MUST be a non-empty string
consisting of alphanumeric, underscore (`_`) or hyphen (`-`) characters.
Within the particular `claims` array, the same `id` MUST NOT
be present more than once.

`path`:
: REQUIRED if the Credential Format uses a JSON-based claims structure; MUST NOT
be present otherwise. The value MUST be a claims path pointer that specifies the path to the claim
within the Verifiable Credential, as defined in (#claims_path_pointer).

`namespace`:
: REQUIRED if the Credential Format is based on the mdoc format defined in ISO 18013-5; MUST NOT be present otherwise. 
The value MUST be a string that specifies the namespace of the data element
within the mdoc, e.g., `org.iso.18013.5.1`.

`claim_name`:
: REQUIRED if the Credential Format is based on mdoc format defined in ISO 18013-5; MUST NOT be present otherwise. 
The value MUST be a string that specifies the data element identifier of the data element within the provided namespace

> in the mdoc, e.g., `first_name`.

Reviewer 11: I still don't understand why these can't or shouldn't or aren't conveyed with `path` too i.e. `["org.iso.18013.5.1","first_name"]` but I'll not stand in the way of progress for this PR and make a note to myself to ask/complain about it later. Or maybe just forget.

Reviewer 12: yeah, I still don't really like this special handling for mdocs. Its pain when implementing it too. So I guess same question from me, can everything just be paths?

Author: Please continue the discussion in #293

`values`:
: OPTIONAL. An array of strings, integers or boolean values that specifies the expected values of the claim.

> If the `values` property is present, the Wallet SHOULD return the claim only if the

Author: yes! Please see the proposal linked in #288

array is the least preferred. Verifiers SHOULD use the principle of least
information disclosure to influence how they order these options. For example, a
proof of age request should prioritize requesting an attribute like
`age_over_18` over an attribute like `birth_date`. The `claim_sets` syntax is
not intended to define options the user can choose from, see (#dcql_query_ui) for
more information.

If the Wallet cannot deliver all claims requested by the Verifier
according to these rules, it MUST NOT return the respective Credential.

#### Selecting Credentials

The following rules apply for selecting Credentials via `credentials` and `credential_sets`:

- If `credential_sets` is not provided, the Verifier requests presentations for all
  Credentials in `credentials` to be returned.
- Otherwise, the Verifier requests presentations of Credentials to be returned satisfying
  - all of the Credential Set Queries in the `credential_sets` array where the `required` attribute is true or omitted, and
  - optionally, any of the other Credential Set Queries.

To satisfy a Credential Set Query, the Wallet MUST return a presentation of a

> Credential or of Credentials that match to one of the `options` inside the

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
set of Credentials that match to one of the `options` inside the
```

> To satisfy a Credential Set Query, the Wallet MUST return a presentation of a
> Credential or of Credentials that match to one of the `options` inside the

Author: ```suggestion
To satisfy a Credential Set Query, the Wallet MUST return presentations of a
set of Credentials that match to one of the `options` inside the
```

the type of the requested Verifiable Credential. All elements in the array MUST
be valid type identifiers as defined in [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-sd-jwt-vc]. The Wallet
MAY return credentials that inherit from any of the specified types, following
the inheritance logic defined in [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-sd-jwt-vc].

### Mobile Documents or mdocs (ISO/IEC 18013 and ISO/IEC 23220 series) {#format_mso_mdoc}

`doctype_value`:
: OPTIONAL. String that specifies an allowed value for the
doctype of the requested Verifiable Credential. It MUST
be a valid doctype identifier as defined in [@ISO.18013-5].

## Claims Path Pointer {#claims_path_pointer}

A claims path pointer is a pointer into the JSON structure of the Verifiable
Credential, identifying one or more claims. A claims path pointer MUST be a
non-empty array of strings and non-negative integers. A string value 
indicates that the respective key is to be selected, the special string value `*` 
indicates that all elements of the currently selected array(s) are to be selected;
and a non-negative integer indicates that the respective index in an array is to be selected. The path
is formed as follows:

>   - Start with an empty array.
>   - To address a particular claim within an object, append the key (claim name)
>     to the array.
>   - To address an element within an array, append the index to the array (as a
>     non-negative, 0-based integer).
>   - To address all elements within an array, append the string `*` to the array.

Reviewer 11: I feel like the intent (I think) of start with an empty array then do one of these 3 things for each 'level' of thing isn't conveyed well here. Maybe something like this? 

```suggestion
Start with an empty array and repeat the following until the full path is formed. 

  - To address a particular claim within an object, append the key (claim name)
    to the array.
  - To address an element within an array, append the index to the array (as a
    non-negative, 0-based integer).
  - To address all elements within an array, append the string `*` to the array.
```

Note that I am absolutely not suggesting a change to the way this path works or something like json path/pointer. Just trying to have this section of text a little more clear.

Verifiers MUST NOT point to the same claim more than once in a single query.
Wallets SHOULD ignore such duplicate claim queries.

> ### Example

Reviewer 11: Dear,
I will humbly submit that this example would go better after `### Processing` so that the processing rules about selection which the example exemplifies are seen before said example.
With Most Entitled Respect,

Author: Dear,
Done.
-Dr. Daniel

}
```

The following shows examples of claims path pointers and the respective selected
claims:

- `["name"]`: The claim `name` with the value `Arthur Dent` is selected.
- `["address"]`: The claim `address` with its sub-claims as the value is
  selected.
- `["address", "street_address"]`: The claim `street_address` with the value `42
  Market Street` is selected.
- `["degrees", "*", "type"]`: All `type` claims in the `degrees` array are
  selected.
- `["nationalities", 1]`: The second nationality is selected.
- `[]` (empty array): The entire Credential is selected.

### Processing

In detail, the array is processed by the Wallet from left to right as follows:

 1. Select the root element of the Credential, i.e., the top-level JSON object.
 2. Process the query of the claims path pointer array from left to right:
    1. If the component is a string, select the element in the respective
       key in the currently selected element(s). If any of the currently
       selected element(s) is not an object, abort processing and return an
       error. If the key does not exist in any element currently selected,
       remove that element from the selection.

>     2. If the component is `*`, select all elements of the currently

Reviewer 11: Are you sure you want to use a different construct here with `*` than in [SD-JWT VC](
https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-oauth-sd-jwt-vc-05.html#name-claim-path) with `null` for effectively the same thing? Or should it change over there? I know, of course, they aren't the same thing exactly but having a difference seems like an unnecessary annoyance.

Author: Good point, let's use what we have in SD-JWT VC for now.

When a VP Token is returned, the respective response MUST include the following parameters:

`vp_token`:
: REQUIRED. The structure of this parameter depends on the Authorization Request:

>  * In case Presentation Exchange was used in the Authorization Request, it is a JSON String or JSON object that MUST contain a single Verifiable Presentation or an array of JSON Strings and JSON objects each of them containing a Verifiable Presentations. Each Verifiable Presentation MUST be represented as a JSON string (that is a base64url-encoded value) or a JSON object depending on a format as defined in Appendix A of [@!OpenID.VCI].  When a single Verifiable Presentation is returned, the array syntax MUST NOT be used.  If Appendix A of [@!OpenID.VCI] defines a rule for encoding the respective Credential format in the Credential Response, this rules MUST also be followed when encoding Credentials of this format in the `vp_token` response parameter. Otherwise, this specification does not require any additional encoding when a Credential format is already represented as a JSON object or a JSON string.

Author: Note: I didn't touch this definition, although it is [rather confusing](https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VP/issues/148), as it will be removed anyway sooner or later.

(4) The Verifier then sends the Authorization Request with the `request-id` as `state` and the `nonce` value created in step (1) to the Wallet.

> (5) After authenticating the End-User and getting her consent to share the request Credentials, the Wallet sends the Authorization Response with the parameters `vp_token`, `presentation_submission` (optional) and `state` to the `response_uri` of the Verifier.  

Reviewer 11: I know Torsten likes to use "her" for users but let's try to be gender natural when possible. 
```suggestion
(5) After authenticating the End-User and getting their consent to share the request Credentials, the Wallet sends the Authorization Response with the parameters `vp_token`, `presentation_submission` (optional) and `state` to the `response_uri` of the Verifier.  
```

        </front>
</reference>

> <reference anchor="BCP47" target="https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp47">
>         <front>
>           <title>BCP47</title>
>           <author>
>             <organization>IETF</organization>
>           </author>
>           <date year="2009"/>
>         </front>
> </reference>

Author: ```suggestion
```
